SDLC -> Software development life cycle
7 phases of SDLC:
   1. Planning
   2. Requirements Analysis
   3. Design
   4. Development (Coding)
   5. Testing
   6. Deployment
   7. Maintenance

Jenkins -> CI/CD tool / opensource tool / Java

The old name of Jenkins is Hudson.

Jenkins uses a master-agent architecture where:
   Master: Manages the Jenkins UI, job configurations, and schedules builds
   Agents: Execute the actual build jobs

What is Continuous integration, continous delivery and continous deployment
•	Continuous Integration (CI): It is the automated process of frequently merging developers' code updates into a shared project and instantly testing them to catch bugs early.
•	Continuous Delivery (CD): It is the practice of ensuring that every tested code change is safely packaged and always ready to be released to users with the manual click of a button.
•	Continuous Deployment (CD): It is the fully automated process where every code change that passes testing is immediately released directly to the users without any human intervention.

Alternatives:
- Github actions
- Code pipeline
- Azure devops
- Bamboo
- Gitlab cicd
- Tekton

Jenkins Pipeline Flow:
Dev -> push -> Github -> Triggers Jenkins Job -> Jenkins
From Jenkins:
1. git checkout
2. Build -> maven, NPM, pip, docker
3. Push the packages to the artifactory -> JFrog, Nexus, ECR, Docker hub
4. Deploy the artifacts -> machine, Tomcat, Docker, Kubernetes

Jenkins will also integrate:
1. sonarqube analysis
2. security analysis

Advanced jenkins pipeline flow:
code commit(webhook triggers)-->build-->Unit testing-->Static code analysis-->Image build-->Push Image-->Security scanning-->
Integration/API testing -->Deploy to staging --> approval -->Deploy to Production --> status notifications

API -> Application Programming Interface
UI -> User Interface
Jenkins has both UI and API.

Triggers help to identify the changes made in github to let Jenkins know to initiate the process.

-> initial admin password is required in the Jenkins UI. You can retrieve it from your EC2 server by running:
   sudo cat /var/lib/jenkins/secrets/initialAdminPassword
-> sudo !! -> run previous command using sudo privileges

What are plugins
Plugins in Jenkins are add-on software modules that you install to give Jenkins new features and allow it to communicate with other tools.

Important plugins of jenkins
•	Pipeline: The most critical plugin. It allows you to write your build processes as code (using a Jenkinsfile) rather than configuring them manually in the UI.
•	Git Plugin: Essential for connecting Jenkins to your Git repositories (GitHub, GitLab, etc.) to pull code and trigger builds automatically.
•	Credentials Binding: Crucial for security. It allows you to inject secrets (like API tokens, passwords, and SSH keys) into your builds without exposing them in your code or logs.
•	Blue Ocean: Upgrades the classic Jenkins interface to a modern, visual dashboard, making it much easier to monitor pipelines and troubleshoot failed builds.
•	Docker Pipeline / Kubernetes: These plugins are standard for modern infrastructure, allowing you to run your build jobs inside clean, isolated containers that spin up and down as needed.
•	Role-Based Access Control (RBAC): Important for teams, this allows you to define specific permissions (view, build, configure) for different users or groups.

Different types of jenkins jobs:
   Freestyle Project
   Pipeline Project
   Multibranch Pipeline
   Multi-Configuration Project 
   Maven Project
   External Job
   Organization Folder
   Folder

To use sudo command in Jenkins:
sudo visudo /etc/sudoers
-> jenkins ALL=(ALL:ALL) NOPASSWD:ALL

Default Installation Directory:
   /var/lib/jenkins

To Bypass Login (Disable Security):
   Edit the configuration file: `sudo vi /var/lib/jenkins/config.xml`
   Find the tag `<useSecurity>true</useSecurity>` and change it to `<useSecurity>false</useSecurity>`.

Jenkins Location Configuration:
   File: `/var/lib/jenkins/jenkins.model.JenkinsLocationConfiguration.xml`
   Update the Jenkins URL (with the correct IP address or domain) here to ensure correct link routing and prevent application lag or redirect issues.

Workspace Directory:
   /var/lib/jenkins/workspace
   This is the default path where the project source code is cloned and where builds are executed.

Keeping Background Processes Alive After Build:
   To run an application or script and keep it running after the Jenkins build is completed, you must bypass the Jenkins Process Tree Killer.
   Method: Set the environment variable `BUILD_ID=dontKillMe` (or `JENKINS_NODE_COOKIE=dontKillMe` in newer Jenkins versions) before your command.
   Example: `daemonize -E BUILD_ID=dontKillMe /path/to/command` or simply exporting the variable before executing a background script.

Importance of Jenkins home directory:
In Jenkins, the home directory is the brain and heart of the entire application.
   It Holds All Configurations
   It Stores All Plugins
   It Contains the Workspace
   It Keeps the Build History
   Backups and Migrations are Easy

A hotfix is an urgent, rapidly deployed code update designed to fix a specific, critical bug or security vulnerability in a live production environment.
A software patch is a planned, routine update that bundles multiple bug fixes, security enhancements, and minor improvements into a single release.

What is waterfall and agile methodology
   •	Waterfall is a linear and sequential approach. You complete the project in strict phases (plan, build, test, deploy), finishing one phase completely before starting the next. It is rigid and delivers the final product all at once at the very end.
   •	Agile is an iterative and flexible approach. You break the project down into short cycles (sprints), delivering small, working pieces of the product continuously. It embraces changing requirements and constant customer feedback.

Difference between monolithic app and micro service app
   •	Monolithic Architecture is a traditional approach where the entire application is built as a single, tightly coupled codebase. All features are deployed together, meaning if you need to update or scale one feature, you have to redeploy and scale the entire application.
   •	Microservices Architecture breaks the application down into small, independent services (e.g., login, payment, cart) that communicate via APIs. Because they are loosely coupled, you can update, deploy, and scale each service individually without affecting the rest of the application.

Jenkins Build Triggers
   Trigger builds remotely - Allows you to trigger a build by sending an HTTP request to a specific Jenkins URL with an authentication token, enabling external scripts, tools, or third-party applications to start jobs on demand.
   Build after other proiects are built - Automatically starts a build as soon as a specified "upstream" project finishes running, linking jobs together to create sequential pipelines or dependent workflows (e.g., deploying only after the testing job succeeds).
   Build periodically - Schedule builds to run at specific times using cron-like syntax, regardless of code changes.
   GitHub hook trigger for GITScm polling - GitHub sends a notification to Jenkins immediately when code is pushed, triggering an instant build.
   Poll SCM - Jenkins periodically checks your source control system for changes and builds only when changes are detected.

How to Set Up a GitHub Hook Trigger for Jenkins:
   1. Go to your GitHub repository settings.
   2. Navigate to "Webhooks" and click to add a new webhook.
   3. In the "Payload URL" field, enter your Jenkins URL followed by `/github-webhook/`.
   Example: http://0.0.0.0:8080/github-webhook/
   4. Click "Add webhook" and save your changes.

Logic behind web hooks of GitHub and jenkins
    When you configure a webhook in GitHub and link it to a Jenkins pipeline, the following sequence of logical steps occurs:
	1.	The Triggering Event: A developer performs an action in GitHub. This is usually a git push to a repository, but it can also be the creation of a Pull Request, a merged branch, or a new release tag.
	2.	The Payload Generation: GitHub packages all the details about that event into a JSON file (the payload). This includes the repository name, the specific branch updated, the commit ID, the commit message, and the user who made the change.
	3.	The HTTP POST Request: GitHub acts as a client and sends an HTTP POST request containing that JSON payload to a specific URL hosted by your Jenkins server (e.g., [https://your-jenkins-server.com/github-webhook/]).
	4.	The Jenkins Reception: The Jenkins server is listening on that URL. It catches the POST request and reads the JSON payload.
	5.	The Matching Logic: Jenkins scans its internal database of jobs/pipelines. It looks for any job that is configured to build the specific GitHub repository and branch mentioned in the payload.
	6.	The Execution: Once a match is found, Jenkins automatically triggers the pipeline to run (compiling code, running tests, deploying, etc.).
	7.	The Feedback Loop (Optional but common): After the build finishes, Jenkins can use the GitHub API to send a status check back to GitHub, displaying a green checkmark (Success) or a red cross (Failure) directly on the GitHub commit or Pull Request.

A parameterized job In Jenkins is a build job or pipeline that is configured to accept input values (parameters) right before it executes.

Parallel jobs (or parallel stages) In Jenkins allow you to execute multiple tasks simultaneously, rather than waiting for one task to finish before starting the next.

Jenkins Agents
   Jenkins agents (formerly called slaves) allow you to distribute builds across multiple machines.

Benefits of Using Agents
   Scalability: Distribute load across multiple machines
   Platform diversity: Run builds on different OS (Windows, Linux, macOS)
   Resource isolation: Dedicated resources for specific projects
   Security: Keep build environments separate from master

Security Concepts in Jenkins:
   1. Authentication
      Authentication is the process of verifying a user's identity. This can be handled through a standard login, an external LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) server, or the internal Jenkins Database (JENKINS DB).
      * Simple Definition: Authentication answers the question, "Who are you?" It is like checking your ID badge at the door. LDAP is a central directory system companies use so you can log in with your normal work credentials, while Jenkins DB means your account is stored directly inside Jenkins.

   2. Authorization
      Authorization deals with granting permissions to users after they have successfully authenticated. It determines what specific actions a user is allowed to perform.
      * Simple Definition: Authorization answers the question, "What are you allowed to do?" It is like having a keycard that only unlocks specific rooms inside the building.

      Authorization Methods for Permissions:
         * Matrix-based: This method uses a global grid (or matrix) to assign specific permissions (like read, write, or build) to users or groups across the entire system.
         * Project-based: This allows you to grant permissions on a per-project basis. For example, a user might be able to edit and build "Project A," but they can only view "Project B."
         * RBAC (Role-Based Access Control): This method involves creating specific "roles" (such as Admin, Developer, or Tester) that have predefined permissions. You then assign users to those roles instead of managing permissions one-by-one.

How to securely store credentials in Jenkins?
   To securely store credentials in Jenkins, you store them centrally using the Credentials Plugin, which encrypts them on the Jenkins master node. To safely use them in a job, you use the Credentials Binding Plugin to inject them as temporary environment variables, which automatically masks the values in the console logs to prevent exposure. 

Types of credentials manager in jenkins
   •	Secret text: A single sensitive string, like a GitHub API token or a webhook URL.
   •	Username with password: A standard login pair, typically used to authenticate with Docker Hub, Nexus, or Artifactory.
   •	Secret file: A sensitive file that Jenkins temporarily places in the workspace during a build, like a kubeconfig file or a .env file.
   •	SSH Username with private key: Used for secure connections, like cloning a private Git repository or SSH-ing into a remote server.
   •	Certificate: Used for securely storing PKCS#12 or JKS certificate files.

Which plugin is used to take backup of jenkins
   ThinBackup Plugin 

Difference between Agile methodology and Devops methodology
   Agile and DevOps solve two different problems in the software lifecycle. Agile focuses on the development phase; it bridges the gap between the business and the developers through iterative sprints to ensure we are building the right product. DevOps focuses on the delivery phase; it bridges the gap between developers and operations by using automation and CI/CD pipelines to ensure that the code Agile teams write can be deployed to production instantly, safely, and reliably.

Jenkins Pipeline Types
•	There are two main types of Jenkins pipeline jobs: Declarative and Scripted.
•	A Declarative pipeline always starts with a pipeline block.
•	A Scripted pipeline always starts with a node block.

Testing Strategies and Environments
•	Testing can be categorized into static and dynamic phases.
•	Static tests are performed before the execution of the application.
•	Dynamic tests are performed after the execution of the application.
•	The standard software deployment flow progresses sequentially through the following environments: Local, Development (Dev), Staging, and Production.
•	Unit tests are used to determine code quality; a standard minimum requirement is 70% code quality, though highly secure applications like banking apps often require up to 95%.
•	The general sequence for application testing includes:
	1.	Unit tests.
	2.	Integration tests.
	3.	Code analysis, typically using Sonar.
	4.	Code vulnerability scanning, typically using Trivy.

SonarQube Architecture and Configuration
•	The SonarQube architecture operates in two main parts.
•	The first part is the server component, which includes the User Interface (UI) and the database.
•	The second part is the Command Line Interface (CLI), specifically the Sonar Scanner, which is the tool that will be used most frequently.
•	The official domain for the tool is sonarsource.com.
•	By default, the SonarQube application runs on port 9000.
•	The initial default credentials to log in are "admin" for the username and "admin" for the password.

which jenkins plugin is used for sonarqube
SonarQube Scanner plugin

types of parameters in perameterized jobs?
1. String Parameter
2. Boolean Parameter
3. Choice Parameter
4. Password Parameter
5. Multi-line String Parameter
6. File Parameter
7. Credentials Parameter
8. Run Parameter

What are upstream and downstream jobs
An upstream job is the first task in a chain that triggers the next step when it finishes successfully. A downstream job is that next step, which waits for the upstream job to finish before starting its own work.

Prioritise jobs on server
By default, Jenkins runs jobs in the exact order they are triggered (first-come, first-served). To change this, I would install the Priority Sorter Plugin. This plugin lets me assign a priority number to important jobs—like a production deployment—so they jump to the front of the queue and run first.

use of throttle build plugin
The Throttle plugin puts a strict speed limit on your Jenkins server. It restricts the maximum number of jobs that are allowed to run at the exact same time. You can set this limit for a single job or a group of jobs.

How to automate builds
To fully automate and scale our builds, I use a combination of Git Webhooks for the trigger, a Jenkinsfile for the execution, and a Jenkins Shared Library to keep the code clean and reusable.

Deployment types:
1. Rolling Deployment-> In a Rolling Deployment, the application instances are upgraded incrementally in small batches rather than all at once.
    How it works: The deployment system takes a subset of servers or pods offline, updates them with the new software version, verifies their health, and returns them to service. This process repeats sequentially until the entire fleet runs the new code.
2. Blue-Green Deployment -> A Blue-Green Deployment is an environment-switching strategy that eliminates risk by running two identical production environments.
    How it works: One environment (Blue) hosts the live production traffic. The new version is deployed and thoroughly tested in the idle environment (Green). Once the new version passes all health checks, a load balancer or routing layer switches all traffic instantly from Blue to Green.
3. Canary Deployment-> A Canary Deployment exposes a small, controlled percentage of live users to the new software version before rolling it out to the entire infrastructure.
    How it works: The new version is deployed to a tiny fraction of infrastructure (e.g., 5% of servers). The routing layer sends 5% of live traffic to this "canary" group. DevOps teams monitor error logs, latency, and system performance. If the metrics look good, the traffic allocation is progressively increased to 100%.
4. A/B Testing (Dark Launching) -> While often confused with Canary, A/B Testing is a business-centric deployment type focused on testing feature performance or user behavior rather than infrastructure stability.
    How it works: The new feature code is deployed to production but kept hidden behind feature flags. Based on specific user demographics, geolocations, or cookie tracking, specific user segments are routed to the new feature while the rest see the old version.
5. Recreate Deployment (All-At-Once)-> The Recreate Deployment is a legacy approach where the existing application is entirely shut down before the new version is brought online.
    How it works: All active server instances running version 1.0 are terminated simultaneously. Once the infrastructure is cleared, the system boots up version 2.0. Users experience an explicit maintenance window during the transition.

Fingerprints and usecases
Jenkins fingerprinting is a built-in feature that creates a unique MD5 checksum of build artifacts or files. It tracks file usage across different jobs and builds without storing the actual file content, mapping out a clear dependency tree of which upstream build produced a file and which downstream build consumed it.
Dependency Tracking: Identify exactly which version of a shared library, jar, or binary artifact was used in a specific downstream build or release job
Traceability & Auditing: Audit the complete lifecycle of a file to see every single build that created, tested, or deployed that exact asset.
Upstream/Downstream Coordination: Automatically trigger or inform downstream projects when a new, specific version of an upstream dependency is built and fingerprinted.
Integrity Verification: Quickly verify if a file has unexpectedly changed or become corrupted between the compilation phase and the deployment phase

build success rates, queue wait times, system resource usage, and agent node status. are the metrices to watch in Jenkins.

To stop or prevent multiple deployment jobs from running at the same time in Jenkins, use the disableConcurrentBuilds() option inside your pipeline script,

In Jenkins, a timeout is used to automatically terminate a build, stage, or step if it takes too long to execute. This prevents stuck jobs from indefinitely consuming system resources.

Capture shell commands in Jenkins



Jenkins shared library



Secret masking mechanasim

Gearmen plugin 
